Recipe to plot generic output from the preprocessor (#2184)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool: doc/sphinx/source/recipes/recipe_monitor.rst

- Time series (plot_type `timeseries`): Generate time series plots. It will always
  generate the full period time series, but if the period is longer than 75
  years, it will also generate two extra time series for the first and last 50
  years. It will produce multi panel plots for data with `shape_id` or `region`
  coordinates of length > 1. Supported coordinates: `time`, `shape_id`
  (optional) and `region` (optional).

- Annual cycle (plot_type `annual_cycle`): Generate an annual cycle plot (timeseries
  like climatological from January to December). It will produce multi panel
  plots for data with `shape_id` or `region` coordinates of length > 1.
  Supported coordinates: `time`, `shape_id` (optional) and `region` (optional).

User settings
=============

User setting files are stored in recipes and in a dedicated yaml config file.

In the variable definitions, users can set the attribute `plot_name` to fix
the variable name that will be used for the plot's title. If it is not set,
mapgenerator will try to choose a sensible one from the standard name
attributes (`long_name`, `standard_name` and `var_name`)

monitor.py
----------

  * plots:

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer: >Really nice addition, thanks @sloosvel! I run the recipe successfully (also added other models from other projects). Some of the plots have overlapping text, but since this is highly customizable I don't think that's an issue now.

Javi's work mostly!

> I think it might be great to mention in the doc that this recipe can plot arbitrary model output. This is a feature that many users asked for. Maybe in the [FAQ]
(https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/main/doc/sphinx/source/faq.rst)? Maybe something like "Can ESMValTool plot arbitrary model output?" and a link to this recipe?

Good idea, I will add that

>I noticed that some plots are in .svg format even though I use output-file-type=png. It looks like this is hardcoded in some parts of the diagnostics. What's the reason for that? I think we should stick to the format the user asks for.

Can't think of any reason, I guess is something pending to be cleaned. Will update.

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Author: >> I noticed that some plots are in .svg format even though I use output-file-type=png. It looks like this is hardcoded in some parts of the diagnostics. What's the reason for that? I think we should stick to the format the user asks for.

>Can't think of any reason, I guess is something pending to be cleaned. Will update.

They are hardoced for size and looks reasons:

- `svg` can be zoomed in and out without losing quality, so it is prefered by default
- `svg` maps are enormous, so it had to be done in `png` format. Timeseries on the other hand are smaller in `svg` than `png`, so they were a better fit for the online app this was originally for.

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 2: On the second point, probably [rasterization](https://matplotlib.org/devdocs/gallery/misc/rasterization_demo.html) would be a perfect fit.

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Author: > On the second point, probably [rasterization](https://matplotlib.org/devdocs/gallery/misc/rasterization_demo.html) would be a perfect fit.

I think that is what is done when saving the files as `png`

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 2: Well, when saving as png of course some form of rasterization takes place. But the point of the link and the associated feature in matplotlib is that you can selectively rasterize elements of a plot when storing in vector formats. This way, the raw map part is effectively embedded as a png or similar inside the svg or pdf, giving you small file sizes while retaining sharp labels and axis and whatnot at all zoom levels.

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer: Well in that case, for this PR maybe it's better to not modify the formats. This recipe and scripts are probably going to be expanded anyway, so details like that can also get addressed.

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 3: svg literally means Scalable Vector Graphics :grin: Welcome back @jvegreg :beer:

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 2: @valeriupredoi, yeah, I know all that. But what does it have to do with anything?

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer: > too little time

I do have very little time right now, sorry.

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 3: @zklaus welcoming Javi, and offering support for your rasterization idea - but I reckon we should not dabble around this just here, I think this whole show will need quite a bit more work to be done in various follow-up PRs, so maybe we can discuss all this there - this is big and functional enough (alas, an excellent contribution!) to be merged now

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 2: Understandable, @sloosvel. Could you open an issue about it?

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer: Done in #2561

>     a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.

Reviewer 2: I took the liberty of assigning the 2.6.0 milestone :blush:

  * cartopy_data_dir:
    Path to cartopy data dir. Defaults to None.
    See https://scitools.org.uk/cartopy/docs/latest/cartopy.html
  * plot_folder:
    Path to the folder to store the figures. It is defined as the
    input paths in ``config-developer.yml``. See
    https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#input-file-paths
    for more details. Defaults to ``~/plots/{dataset}/{exp}/{modeling_realm}/{real_name}``
  * plot_filename:
    Filename pattern for the plots. it is defined as the input
    files in in ``config-developer.yml``. See
    https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#input-file-paths
    for more details. Defaults to ``{plot_type}_{real_name}_{dataset}_{mip}_{exp}_{ensemble}``.
  * config_file:
    Path to the monitor config file. Defaults to
    ``monitor_config.yml`` in the same folder as the diagnostic script.

Plot specific options:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- monclim:
   + maps:
     List of maps to plot, as defined in the config file. Defaults to ``[global]``.
   + months:

>      Select only specific months. Defaults to ``None`` (do not select).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     Select only specific months. Defaults to ``None`` (ie it does not select any month).
```

User settings
=============

User setting files are stored in recipes and in a dedicated yaml config file.

In the variable definitions, users can set the attribute `plot_name` to fix
the variable name that will be used for the plot's title. If it is not set,
mapgenerator will try to choose a sensible one from the standard name
attributes (`long_name`, `standard_name` and `var_name`)

monitor.py
----------

  * plots:
    a dictionary containing the plots to make, with its own options.
  * cartopy_data_dir:
    Path to cartopy data dir. Defaults to None.
    See https://scitools.org.uk/cartopy/docs/latest/cartopy.html
  * plot_folder:
    Path to the folder to store the figures. It is defined as the
    input paths in ``config-developer.yml``. See
    https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#input-file-paths
    for more details. Defaults to ``~/plots/{dataset}/{exp}/{modeling_realm}/{real_name}``
  * plot_filename:
    Filename pattern for the plots. it is defined as the input
    files in in ``config-developer.yml``. See
    https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/ESMValCore/en/latest/quickstart/configure.html#input-file-paths

>     for more details. Defaults to ``{plot_type}_{real_name}_{dataset}_{mip}_{exp}_{ensemble}``

Reviewer: the name of the plot as it appears in `List of plots available in monitor.py`

  * config_file:
    Path to the monitor config file. Defaults to
    ``monitor_config.yml`` in the same folder as the diagnostic script.

Plot specific options:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- monclim:
   + maps:
     List of maps to plot, as defined in the config file. Defaults to ``[global]``.
   + months:

>      Select only specific months. Defaults to ``None`` (do not select).

Reviewer: it's related to `None`

      sos:
         # If default is defined, entries are treated as map specific option.
         # Missing values in map definitionas are taken from variable's default
         # definition
         default:
            <<: *default
            bounds: 25-41,1
            extend: both
         arctic:
            bounds: 25-40,1
         antarctic:
            bounds: 30-40,0.5
      nao: &nao
         <<: *default
         extend: both
         # Variable definitions can override map parameters. Use with caution.
         bounds: [-0.03, -0.025, -0.02, -0.015, -0.01, -0.005, 0., 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03]
         projection: PlateCarree
         smooth: true
         lon: [-90, -60, -30, 0, 30]
         lat: [20, 40, 60, 80]
         colorbar_location: bottom
         suptitle_pos: 0.87
      sam:
         <<: *nao
         lat: [-90, -80, -70, -60, -50]
         projection: SouthPolarStereo
         projection_kwargs:
            central_longitude: 270
         smooth: true
         lon: [-120, -60, 0, 60, 120, 180]

Variables
=========

> * Any, but the dimensionality should match the expected by each plot

Reviewer 3: expected what?

Reviewer: Does `Any, but the dimensions of the variable should match the ones expected by each plot` read better to you?

Observations and reformat scripts
=================================

> *None*

Reviewer 3: what's this for then?
